https://www.goodreads.com/review/show/1134902070?book_show_action=false&from_review_page=1

To Kill a Mockingbird has become such a potent cultural symbol in the Western world, especially in the United States, that you risk being seen as an insensitive cynic [or a heartless bastard (hide spoiler)] if you sound a dissenting note. From a moral standpoint it attacks institutionalised racism against the black people in the United States back in the day when it was common to treat them as subhumans. This is a noble goal, but judged on criteria of literary merit, I contend that there's not much in the book.

Flannery O'Connor called it a "children's novel." She did not intend it as a compliment. The novel suffers from a saccharine dose of sentiment, as it were, and it is fair to label it as a black-and-white cliché, literally. I found the characters two-dimenstional, singly pursuing their idea without meaningful conflict that could have lent them some humanity. Atticus Finch, a morally upright man and gentle father, is the author's moralising mouthpiece who, supine and misty in the early stages of the story, is catapulted into action when he takes upon himself to defend the black man. If there's more to Atticus, I'm sure to have missed it completely. There is an oft-quoted famous line that goes like this:

You never really understand a person until you consider things from his point of view. Until you climb inside of his skin and walk around in it.

A bit of Captain Obvious wouldn't you say? It would have been illuminating if Ms Lee could make the reader climb inside the skin for a walk.

A bigger problem, however, is when the narrative casts a retrospective look at old value systems and then comments from the vantage point of modern times. This is no invitation to rationalise historical bigotry or misogyny but to take stock of the forces and attitudes, in their true nature, that created and sustained them. Mockingbird falls into the same trap.

You can split the book into two separate novellas, neatly, like a cake; so big is the disconnect between the first half which reads like an interesting ghost story and the second half which is no more than a reportage on the proceedings of a criminal case in a court of law where a black man is facing (false) charges of rape. Through these court proceedings Ms Lee tries to paint a dismal picture of the times when hapless black people didn't stand a chance once a white man accused them of wrongdoing.

If one is to judge a work of fiction, one is to judge it on literary merit and not entirely for the subjective moral urgency of its political or social content, though I understand the need to incorporate minority voices that had been suppressed into mute existence for many centuries (But this story, unlike Toni Morrison's novels, is written from the white man's perspective). Quite a few famous post-colonial novels fall in this category: thin on literary craft but still appreciated for their social or political import. So I can understand why an average novel like this one spoke so strongly to the changing zeitgeist and struck a chord with millions of readers.

Postscript: I understand many would see this novel positively for its role in raising public awareness on racial bigotry and discrimination in the 1930s United States and before. This, of course, I appreciate very much.

December 2014