https://www.goodreads.com/review/show/855595533?book_show_action=false&from_review_page=1

Classic Southern Novel Must Be Seen in Context of Its Time and Place



Although I enjoyed To Kill a Mockingbird, I must admit that there are many elements of the story that, by today's standards, would be considered racist.

For one thing, the story involves a great white man who tries to save a black man's life.
And the focus of the story is on the white man, Atticus Finch, rather than on the black man, Tom Robinson, who is a minor character and who, we are told, was quickly forgotten.

Our hearts are warmed by the story of a righteous white man [, even though he actually fails to save Tom's life or even win his court case. (hide spoiler)]

One might ask, why didn't an African-American try to save Tom Robinson? However, I suppose, in the context of Maycomb, Alabama in the Depression years of 1933 through 1936, it would have been impossible for a black man to become a lawyer or to represent anyone in court. 

One might also ask why the court convicted Tom of a crime he obviously didn't do on the evidence of two white people who were clearly unreliable liars. One of them---Bob Ewell, was also a criminal.

Why is Dolphus Raymond rejected by the town because he prefers to live among African-Americans?

Again--why was Scout discouraged from visiting the Negro church or sitting in the "colored" section of the court house (she did both?) Why did Aunt Alexandra want Atticus to fire his well loved black cook Calpurnia, who was like a mother to Atticus's two children, Scout and Jem.

Again, I have to point to context: time and place. This was the reality in the fictional town of Maycomb, Alabama in the 1930's.

However, contrast To Kill a Mockingbird with another Southern novel that takes place in a Georgia mill town during the same time period (the 1930's Depression), Carson McCullers' The Heart Is A Lonely Hunter. In that book, Dr. Benedict Copeland, an idealistic but embittered African-American medical doctor, fails in his attempts to lead local blacks to embrace self-determination and education. But it's not a case of the "Great White Savior" in The Heart Is A Lonely Hunter. In this novel, at least, we see Southern African-Americans attempting to take their destiny into their own hands. Tomboyish musician Mick Taylor in The Heart Is A Lonely Hunter is like an older, poorer version of Scout with less loving parents. 

That said, I still enjoyed the story in To Kill a Mockingbird a lot. 

Atticus Finch, a lawyer in his fifties, is attempting to raise his two children, Jem and Scout (Jean Louise) himself, as his wife died many years ago. He does have the assistance of his Negro cook, Calpurnia. The Finches live in Maycomb, Alabama.

The Finches have a strange, reclusive neighbor, Boo Radley, who almost never leaves his house. People suspect Boo of all kinds of strange doings.

Bob and Mayella Ewell (father and daughter), two local "white trash" types, accuse Tom Robinson, a young Negro, of raping Mayella. The accusations lead to a sensationalized court case. The local court appoints Atticus to defend Tom. Atticus takes the job seriously, and makes it clear to everyone that the Ewells are liars, even though Atticus knows that the jury will convict Tom anyway, simply because he is black.

Various locals threaten Atticus and his family during and after the court case.

[Atticus fails to save Tom from imprisonment. Tom is shot by prison officials during his failed attempt to escape the prison. (hide spoiler)]

The characters, and the time and place, are what make the novel memorable in spite of its naive racism.

Atticus does come across as a humble, but noble man. He is a man of principle, and believes that black people are human and should have rights like white people. He is not cowed or deterred by the various attempts to assault both him and his children. He is not greedy or self-serving. He is undeterred by the differing opinions of others. He follows his conscience, regardless of the consequences.

In spite of everything that happens, Atticus does not become cynical. He continues to believe in the basic decency and kindness of his neighbors, even when they do things that challenge those beliefs. He is unfailingly polite and kind to everyone, the epitome of a Southern gentleman. He is very compassionate, even to those who are rude to him. For example, he is kind to Mrs. Dubose, an elderly woman who calls Atticus a "nigger lover". He understands that her rudeness comes in part, from her illness [ and her morhpine addiction. (hide spoiler)]

Atticus is also, in spite of his constant protestations that he isn't the best parent, actually a very good father. He clearly loves his children, and raises them wisely. He understands them and backs off when necessary to let them figure things out themselves. The only time he is severe with them is when they do things he considers to be wrong, as when they keep attempting to spy on Boo Radley. His notions of child-rearing are actually ahead of their time. His kids call him "Atticus" instead of "Dad".

Scout (Jean Louise Finch) is also a memorable character. She's around eight years old when the book starts. She is a spirited and outspoken girl, and a tomboy (she prefers to wear overalls instead of dresses). But she is not mean or discourteous (although she does occasionally beat up other kids at school). Her innocent and forthcoming personality saves the day on several occasions.

Maycomb, Alabama is a town in a time and place in which people were simpler and more innocent in some ways. The pace of life was slower and more peaceful and people didn't seem to be so obsessed with money (although of course, most people didn't have much). Certainly, it was a brutal time and place in which to be African-American. But in small town Maycomb, everyone knew a lot about their neighbors. Of course that meant constant gossip and bad mouthing. On the other hand, people were kind and helpful to their neighbors in ways that would not happen now. For example, when Maudie Atkinson's house burns down (Miss Atkinson lives across the street from the Finches), she goes to stay with Miss Stephanie Crawford, another local woman who lives alone

Harper Lee gives us memorable portraits of many of the inhabitants of this sleepy, old, Southern town. There are plenty of colorful minor characters.

Sissy Spacek did a passably good job reading the audio.