https://www.goodreads.com/review/show/206925851?book_show_action=false&from_review_page=1

***NO SPOILERS***

I don’t know that it’s ever happened that I’ve read a book and felt the summary on its dust jacket sounded better than what I actually read (edited, June 3, 2016: Boy, Snow, Bird is now possibly a worse offender). It’s the other way around, usually; the summary doesn’t do the actual story justice, or it might not even reveal that much. Not with this book. When it first hit bookstores, publishers marketed The Night Circus as “the next Harry Potter,” which, every time I recall this con, makes me want to tear my pretty hardback copy into tiny pieces and light them on fire. The Night Circus promises an electrifying romance between dueling illusionists, Celia and Marco, who are fighting to the death: “Unbeknownst to the players, this is a game in which only one can be left standing, and the circus is but the stage for a remarkable battle of imagination and will.” Well, as it turns out, the “duel” is not a battle at all; it is a series of illusions--at the circus--that each creates to impress the other over the course of more than ten years. There’s no rush to conclude this “duel,” apparently. That lack of urgency makes for a very yawn-inducing story, particularly at the story’s halfway point. 

I was most looking forward to getting to this part of the story: “...they innocently tumble head-first into love. A deep, passionate, and magical love that makes the lights flicker and the room grow warm whenever they so much as brush hands.” I was sorely disappointed. Celia and Marco somehow fall in love; Morgenstern never showed the development of their love. For their first few interactions, Celia plays it cool with Marco; then the moment she doesn't play it cool is the moment Cupid hits his mark. They touch hands at one point, and something happens with the lights. That happens maybe twice in the entire 387 pages. Given how this light-flickering made it into the summary, however, you’d think these two were causing regular brownouts; furthermore, there’s nothing deep or passionate about this couple’s love. The lone sex scene in the book is a literal bodice-ripper, and it’s clichéd and dispassionate. Morgenstern tried her damnedest, but there's zero heat between these two, no matter how warm they make the room simply by brushing hands. 

The Night Circus contains an extensive cast of characters who are more mysterious than they have any right to be and are very shallowly drawn. Who is Prospero, really? Who is Mr. A.H., really? Here are two intriguing characters portrayed as having possible psychopathic tendencies, yet they are nothing but shadows in the story. Marco is hard to like at times, something that really seems like a fatal flaw. Celia is almost more noteworthy for her gowns than for her personality. Isobel is a pining, ignored, sad sack character who wastes time searching for answers in tarot cards. The list goes on. Each character can be perfectly, thoroughly summarized in a single sentence. 

The descriptions are excessive to the point of being purple, slowing the story’s momentum each and every time. Morgenstern paid extreme attention to writing detail at the expense of writing a solid, organized plot that clips along at a steady pace. Pretty, unique descriptions do not a story make; the all-important plot and three-dimensional character development must be in place before anything else. Focusing on descriptions while sacrificing plot and character development is like buying an entire house’s worth of furniture when you have no house to put it in. 

I think one of the best pieces of writing advice I’ve ever read after “show, don't tell,” is William Faulkner’s instruction to “kill your darlings.” If Morgenstern had killed her darlings, The Night Circus would be shorter by at least one-third and possibly, hopefully, have a tighter plot while being a little more fun to read—albeit with the same one-dimensional, unknowable characters.

Final verdict: Skip without reservation and read the Harry Potter series instead for true magic in book form.
