Affective Computing (1995)
Rosalind Picard

Fear, Emotion, and Science
	Songs vs. laws
	Limbic perception
	Thingking-feeling axix
		Nonlimbic emotion and decision making
		The Turing test
	The effective piano teacher
		The Quintessential emotional experience

Sentic Modulation
	Poker face, poker body?
	Visceral and cognitive emotions
		No one can read your mind
		Emotional experience, expression, and state
		"Get that look off your face"
		It's not what she said, but how she said it
		Beyond face and voice
		Sentic hotline
		Inducement of sentic states
	Sentic state pattern recognition
		Basic or prototype emotions
		Affective state models
		Cathexis in computing

Things Better Left Unexplored?
	Computers that kill
		A dilemma
	Unemotional, but affective computers
		Four cases
	Affective symmetry

Affective Media
	Entertainment
	Expression
		Expressive mail
	Film/Video
		Skip ahead to the interesting part
	Environments
	Aesthetic pleasure
		Hidden forms
		Personal taste
		Design
	Affective wearable computers
		Implications for emotion theory

Summary

-----
Affective Computing (Wikipedia)
Affective computing is the study and development of systems and devices that can recognize, interpret, process, and simulate human affects. It is an interdisciplinary field spanning computer science, psychology, and cognitive science.[1] While the origins of the field may be traced as far back as to early philosophical enquiries into emotion,[2] the more modern branch of computer science originated with Rosalind Picard's 1995 paper[3] on affective computing.[4][5] A motivation for the research is the ability to simulate empathy. The machine should interpret the emotional state of humans and adapt its behaviour to them, giving an appropriate response for those emotions.
--
Affective computing is human-computer interaction in which a device has the ability to detect and appropriately respond to its user's emotions and other stimuli. A computing device with this capacity could gather cues to user emotion from a variety of sources. Facial expressions, posture, gestures, speech, the force or rhythm of key strokes and the temperature changes of the hand on a mouse can all signify changes in the user's emotional state, and these can all be detected and interpreted by a computer. A built-in camera captures images of the user and algorithm s are used to process the data to yield meaningful information. Speech recognition and gesture recognition are among the other technologies being explored for affective computing applications.

Affective computing could offer benefits in an almost limitless range of applications. For example, in e-learning situations, the computer could detect from available cues when the user was having difficulty and offer expanded explanations or additional information. Other applications include e-therapy: psychological health services, such as counseling, delivered online. Internet-based therapy, although increasingly common, does not give a therapist as many cues to the client's emotional state as are available in a real-world session. Through affective computing, the client's posture, gestures, and facial expressions could be used, along with their words, for a more accurate evaluation of their psychological state.

Affective computing gets its name from the field of Psychology, in which "affect" is, basically, a synonym for "emotion."

--
Emotional Intelligence
- the capacity to be aware of, control, and express one's emotions, and to handle interpersonal relationships judiciously and empathetically.
- Emotional Intelligence (EQ or EI) is a term created by two researchers – Peter Salavoy and John Mayer – and popularized by Dan Goleman in his 1996 book of the same name. We define EI as the ability to: Recognize, understand and manage our own emotions.

-----
Affective Computing
by Rosalind Picard
QA76.9 H85 P5 1997