https://www.goodreads.com/review/show/156668107?book_show_action=false&from_review_page=1

This book has almost 99,000 GR ratings with an average of 4.48 stars! 60% five stars! That seems almost as amazing as the story itself. Could a book be that good? Let’s see. Step right up! See the amazing man fend off sharks in the Pacific Ocean, survive the cruelty of being a Japanese prisoner of war and live to tell the story!

The inside book jacket reads, “In boyhood, he’d been a cunning and incorrigible delinquent, breaking into houses, brawling, and fleeing his home to ride the rails.” I had to wonder if the author hadn’t gone overboard based on old family stories run amuck. I thought credibility was questionable. Could all of those five star people been conned by a comic book character?

Then I read The NY Times book review that touches on some of the story behind the story of this book:

Ms. Hillenbrand has written her book so breathlessly, and with such tight focus, that she makes it difficult to guess what will happen to him from one moment to the next, let alone how long he was able to survive under extreme duress. So we must acknowledge the good news that Mr. Zamperini is now a snappy 93, and better able to promote this book than its author.
…
The Louie Zamperini story has been crammed with excitement right from the start. “Outraces Death” read a caption with his picture in The New York Times on Sept. 9, 1945, when this athlete’s suffering and survival became big news. …endurance is what Ms. Hillenbrand has made “Unbroken” all about. 
…
And if some of it sounds too much like pulp fiction to be true, Ms. Hillenbrand has also done a bang-up research job. She interviewed Mr. Zamperini more than 75 times. He has an excellent memory. 
Source: http://www.nytimes.com/2010/11/15/boo...


Let’s just say that Mr. Zamperini is a publisher’s dream. He could make you believe in Paul Bunyan and Babe the Blue Ox. So far the nonagenarian has written two memoirs with the help of ghost writers. In Unbroken he found one of the best story tellers in the business. 

Hillenbrand combines detailed statistics with individual stories to create an overwhelming sense of the horror of being a B-24 bomber crew in the Pacific. “Life was cheap in war,” said one participant. You definitely get that impression.

In the early days of 1943, as men died one after another, every man dealt with the losses in a different way. Somewhere along the way, a ritual sprang up. If a man didn’t return, the others would open his footlocker, take out his liquor, and have a drink in his honor. In a war without funerals, it was the best they could do.


Similarly, the post war individual stories, mostly about men we have gotten to know in earlier chapters, were set against statistics about the physical and emotional disabilities of post war POWs.

These statistics translated into tormented, and sometimes ruined, lives. Flashbacks … were common. Intense nightmares were almost ubiquitous.


The combination of personalized stories and generalized statistics was an effective writing technique. 

As I read the book, one thing jumped out at me: mistakes that might be considered incompetence in another setting. For example:

In August 1942, after a botched American raid on a Japanese base at Makin in the Marshall Islands, nine marines had been mistakenly left behind. Captured by the Japanese, they had disappeared.


Mistakes happen regularly that cost lives. Mistakes in situations that make the difference between life and death. These are people acting in high stress situations: mistakes happen. Where there are heroes, there will also likely be, to use a sport’s phrase, goats. At the same time, I am angry that one person’s mistakes lead to deaths of others. That’s some mistake to live with for the rest of your life, if you happen to live. 

The book raises many topics as they apply to the specifics in this book. But many issues are similar or the same as would likely apply in any war for any side in the conflict. A few of those issues are:

Created memories
Miracles 
Effect of emaciation and starvation
Belief of family in Louie’s survival
Impact of Japanese culture on POW experience 
Analyzing the genesis of Japanese inhuman treatment of POWs
The morality of what humans do in wartime: brutalizing POWs vs. Hiroshima 
The spoils of war for liberated POWs: alcohol, women and acclaim
Post war POW agony and ecstasy
Restorative justice and reconciliation

Hillenbrand spoke directly about the inability of some to accept the total truth of the horrendous experiences Pacific POWs brought home with them. POWs “carried unspeakable memories of torture and humiliation” that were often disbelieved when spoken. Some were simply withheld by the POWs. It is that disbelief that holds me to three stars. I found the book gripping, and yet more like historical fiction than non-fiction. The story of “Survival, Resilience, and Redemption” has the makings of what I am sure will be a blockbuster movie. But we all know about creative license. It happens. Still, at the end of a good movie I sometimes have real tears in my eyes. That happened to me with this book.

I imagined that I saw Louie Zamperini up on the stage exhorting his audiences as he had once seen Billy Graham exhort his. He is going into his inspirational story that he has told dozens of times before – and hundreds of times in his imagination he has told the story to himself. His dreams and nightmares became his reality. But in spite of some far more than awful experiences in WW2, today life is good for Louie. His life made him into a performer who loves being on stage.

I have been to a few Alcoholics Anonymous meetings in my life. When a person has an anniversary of 5, 10, 20, or 30 years of not drinking, s/he often stands in front of the group and tells her/his story. The story is often horrendous and filled with human failings and wrong turns of life that often start when the person was very young. But then there is the moment s/he hit bottom and came to believe that her/his Higher Power could help change life’s direction. That person faced the worst you can imagine and survived. One of the messages is that you too can conquer adversity with the help of God and the people in AA. Billy Graham was evidently the AA group substitute for Louie.

Our experience with the system of justice shows that there can be different conclusions from the same experience. Consider the example of the prison camp guard called The Bird. This man played a major role in the horrendous violence against Pacific POWs. The allegations against him take up pages of the book. He is described to the point where calling him psychotic would be kind. His ultimate evaluation of his own conduct as a war criminal was that he saw himself as a victim who was not guilty of any crimes. Although he is clearly convicted in the book, he was never tried. Efforts to bring him to trial failed when he went into hiding. Later charges against him and other alleged and convicted war criminals were modified and dropped as a part of diplomatic negotiations between the U.S. and Japan as the U.S. sought allies in the Cold War.

Unbroken includes 397 Notes giving many of the sources from which Laura Hillenbrand drew her material. Interviews (often over the telephone and written) are a significant source of her information. Since we live in the U.S., we know the good guys from the bad guys in WW2. We also know that dehumanization is one of the ways we make it possible to kill other people. While this book does tell about some Japanese who were not horrible, the main view of the Japanese is not positive. While Zamperini may have found Jesus and forgiven the Japanese, readers of the book may not have that same viewpoint. 

Our judicial system is based on there being two sides to every story and a court decision cannot be made until you have heard both sides. What does that mean in this case where the evidence seems so irrefutable on one side? Has The Bird been proven guilty of being a war criminal? But a book is not a trial. There will be no trial.

What to do with the information in this book is up to each reader. Does it make a difference to you how wars are fought or is it mostly important that the good guys (us) win? What role should diplomacy play in these kinds of post war situations where international laws are ignored?

U.S. soldiers have occasionally been tried for wrongdoing in wartime in Vietnam and recently in Iraq. Such cases are very rare in the U.S. and often do not end with a conviction. Are war crimes common or is war an anything goes event? Is it best to look the other way unless Americans are the victims?

Unbroken is about as direct as a book can be about Japanese war crimes with testimony from victims who survived. But, for me, it was too much like war propaganda for a nation that is too invested in maintaining a war machine so powerful that no nation would dare try to take us on. I remember reading Thirty Seconds Over Tokyo when I was an impressionable teenager. It was a book about heroes and heroics, war in all its gore and glory.

Is Unbroken more than an extremely well done book like Thirty Seconds Over Tokyo that was published in 1943 in the midst of WW2?

Three stars. That’s the best I can do for now.