https://www.goodreads.com/review/show/525774197?book_show_action=false&from_review_page=1

This book is everything that I do not look for in a work of non-fiction. 

First off, the whole thing seemed to be narrated by Jiminy Cricket. The book seemed to have a "Golly-gee Whitakers, Everything-Is-Going-To-Turn-Out-Fine" tone to it, even during the torture scenes. It read like the narrative to one of those 1960's Disney live-action nature movies in which we watch a cute, innocent wolf-cub survive a winter in the forest against all insurmountable odds. It forces sentimentality into the plot; it tells us exactly what and when to feel.... which is fine when I read a novel, but not when I read a biography.

Secondly, it is hyper-sensory. It describes colours and scents and sounds and textures as if the narrator were right there, on the spot, as if they were part of the action... but of course, this is impossible. The description is so extreme, hyperbolic, and drastic that it is exhausting to read. It can't just be a "cloudy sky" it has to be: The MOST gun-metaled, cloud-heavy, gray and black canopy of endless sky that anyone had ever seen or would look at as long as the Gods in Heaven would allow meek, human eyes to look upon such wonders. Again, this might be something that I would applaud in a novel, but not so much in a biography.

Thirdly, there is no questioning. The narrative forces us, no matter what his behaviour is, to view this character (and I say character because he doesn't read like a real person even though I know Zamperini is real) as a hero. No question. He is a hero. If you think otherwise, then you are wrong and something is wrong with you. For example: Even though he is a hellion of a child that victimizes people all over town and exhibits characteristics of a sociopath, we are supposed to feel bad for him when he gets spanked to tears. As an audience, we are not meant to question his character or motives or actions, it is all given to us wrapped up with a perfect, rigidly defined, contextual bow. In fiction, we have protagonists and antagonists.... in real life, not so much.

It also needs to be said that this story has one of the most conventional antagonists of all time, almost like a monster from a horror flick, or chainsaw wielding maniac. A silly caricature. 

Finally. This is a story. At best, it is a “Based on a True …” story. It is sensationalized. It is embellished reality. Truthiness. Selective facts. Which is all great, if you are telling a little fib for entertainment; but, I don’t pick up non-fiction for fibs. I turn to fiction if I want a good story. With this book, Hillenbrand once again proves that she can put us in the action, that we can feel like we are watching the race as if we are sitting in the bleachers, but when it comes to relaying facts about history, she needs to rely on photographs from the finish line.

I can see the movie trailer now: “Based on a True Story”.