https://www.goodreads.com/review/show/1560897148?book_show_action=false&from_review_page=1

GUYS, GOODREADS JUST ATE EVERYTHING I WROTE and I don't remember all of my feels because I already felt them... but here we go again:

The writing here was straight up gorgeous, but the story was kind of mysterious and hard to pick out at times. I really loved Bailey, Poppet, & Widget and the aesthetic of the circus! But there were too many people and not enough action. I mean, the circus itself felt like the main character, but even that was rather elusive. I couldn’t even pinpoint what exactly the whole competition was until about 70% because it was unclear what the rules were or what they were even competing for:

I confess, I don’t fully understand the point, even after all this time.”
“Nor do I. I suspect calling it a challenge or a game is not entirely accurate. I’ve come to think of it more as a dual exhibition.”


Mmmk. So basically there were a lot of great quotes, fun scenes, and really creative bits spread throughout a story that was otherwise not terribly exciting or fast-paced. I still gave this the 3.5 stars I thought I’d give it if I had read it before The Crown’s Game, which brings me to…


This comparison was inevitable:
It’s kind of hilarious how similar this book is to The Crown’s Game by Evelyn Skye. Like not just the general plot or the relationships of the enchanters to their mentors, but even small details like the love square, how they can go into the guy’s dreamscapes, the dance, people turning into mist, how the girl loves snow/ice, and the points in the plot where she gets her fortune told or goes to his flat.

I know they’re totally different books, but seeing how The Crown’s Game “retold” this story really highlighted what didn’t work as well here. The Crown’s Game set up the rules and what the game actually was right from the beginning, so the story was instantly more driven, focused, and fun. It was clear why one enchanter needed to die. It was clear what each of their moves were and what was going on. In The Night Circus they’re mostly doing magic tricks in a tent off-screen to “sustain” the circus and the story checks in with them every few years. Definitely not as exciting. I just cared about the characters in The Crown’s Game SO much more that it was kind of hard to take this book for what it was without comparing.

The Night Circus was still a really imaginative, original, gorgeous read, though! I wasn’t that into the first half, but loved the last 10% enough to add a few stars. But if you’re only going to read one story about two enchanters who have to compete to the death but end up falling in love, I’d go with The Crown’s Game instead.